---
layout: post
title:  "Sorting"
date:   2015-12-06 10:39:54 +0000
categories: core
---


This code and tests for each sorting method detailed below can be found on my github.

# Insertion Sort

Take the next item to be sorted and insert the item into the array in the correct place.

## Pros

* Easy to implement
* East to implement inplace

## Cons

* O(n^2)
* Have to move all the subsequent items

## Code

    public List<String> sort(List<String> strings) {
        if (strings.size() > 1) {
            List<String> sorted = new ArrayList<>(strings.size());
            for (String candidate : strings) {
                sorted.add(establishIndexFor(candidate, sorted), candidate);
            }
            return sorted;
        } else {
            return strings;
        }

    }

    private int establishIndexFor(String candidate, List<String> sorted) {
        if(sorted.isEmpty())
            return 0;
        for (int i = 0; i < sorted.size(); i++) {
            if (candidate.compareTo(sorted.get(i)) >= 0)
                if (i < sorted.size() - 1) {
                    if (candidate.compareTo(sorted.get(i + 1)) <= 0) {
                        return i + 1;
                    }
                } else {
                    return sorted.size();
                }
            else {
                return i;
            }
        }
        return sorted.size();
    }

# Selection Sort

Select the next item that will fit in the sorted array from the input data set.

## Pros

* Easy to implement
* East to implement inplace

## Cons

* O(n^2)

## Code

    public List<String> sort(List<String> strings) {
        if (strings.size() > 1) {
            List<String> sorted = new ArrayList<>();
            int i =0;
            while (i < strings.size()) {
                if (smallestString(strings.get(i), strings.subList(i + 1, strings.size()))) {
                    sorted.add(strings.get(i));
                    strings.remove(i);
                    i = 0;
                }else
                    i++;
            }
            return sorted;
        } else {
            return strings;
        }
    }

    private boolean smallestString(String candidate, List<String> strings) {
        for (String s : strings) {
            if (candidate.compareTo(s) > 0)
                return false;
        }
        return true;
    }

# Mergesort
Mergesort involves splitting the input data in half sorting each half recursively and merging the sorted halves back
together.  The efficiency of mergesort relies upon the efficiency of merging the two sorted halves together.  This merge
is done by comparing the first item of each of the sorted halves, and putting the smallest item into the new list.  This
action its repeated until both of the sorted halves are empty.

The work done to merge two sorted lists each of length n/2 is n-1 comparisons.  For two sorted lists of n/4 is n-2 comparisons
and so on.  This continues for log(n) occurrences.  Therefore mergesort takes O(n log(n)) in the worst case.


## Code


    public List<String> sort(List<String> strings) {
        if (strings.size() > 1) {
            List<String> left = sort(strings.subList(0, strings.size() / 2));
            List<String> right = sort(strings.subList(strings.size() / 2, strings.size()));
            return merge(left, right);
        }
        return strings;
    }

    private List<String> merge(List<String> left, List<String> right) {
        List<String> result = new ArrayList<>();
        int leftI = 0;
        int rightI = 0;
        while (leftI < left.size() && rightI < right.size()) {
            if (left.get(leftI).compareTo(right.get(rightI)) < 0) {
                result.add(left.get(leftI));
                leftI++;
            } else {
                result.add(right.get(rightI));
                rightI++;
            }
        }
        if (leftI < left.size()) {
            result.addAll(left.subList(leftI, left.size()));
        }
        if ((rightI < right.size())) {
            result.addAll(right.subList(rightI, right.size()));
        }
        return result;
    }


## Pros

* Stable
* O (N lg N) performance guarantee

## Cons

* Not inplace when sorting arrays
* There is too much overhead for small input data sets

## Improvements

* Use insertion or selection sorts for small arrays sub 10, this can improve runtime

# Quicksort

Like mergesort quicksort also uses recursion.  First randomly select a partitioning element k.  Put all items smaller than
k on the left hand side fo the array.  All items larger than k go on the right hand side. Then insert k between these two
sections of the array. Then perform the same operation to each of the two sections of the array.

## Code

## Pros

* Inplace
* N lg N probabilistic guarantee
* Faster than mergesort in practice for the average case

## Cons

* Not Stable
* Worst case O(n^2) for sorted, or reverse sorted data sets
* Worst case also applies to data sets with lots of duplicate keys
* There is too much overhead for small input data sets
* Not easy to implement

## Improvements

* Randomly shuffle items at the begnning so as to have a higher chance of performing an average cas scenario
* Use insertion or selection sorts for small arrays sub 10, this can improve runtime by up to 20%
* Chose the partitioning element carefully, maybe by taking a small sampling, this can improve running time by 10%