---
layout: post
title:  "Clean Code Book Club - Chapter 1"
date:   2015-12-11 10:39:54 +0000
categories: cleancode
---

At work I have initiated a book club and we are going to be reading the book Clean Code by Robert Martin.  I heavily recommend this book for all professional software developers, but especially for all Java and Object-Orientated developers.   In order to kick the book club off I am going to run the first session on the first chapter which is also called Clean Code. 

#Introduction
**The only valid measurement of code quality : WTFs/minute**

The introduction highlights the need for craftsmanship and sums up craftsmanship as the union of knowledge and practice.  This book will give you the knowledge but it will also get the reader to practice this knowledge by going through lots of code examples.  The introduction stresses the need not to skip the work required to understand the code examples. 

The book is divided into three parts:

1. Principles, patterns and practices
2. Case studies
3. Heuristics and smells knowledge base

#Clean Code
The book works on two assumptions 

1. There will be code
2. No one wants "Bad Code"

##Why is there Bad Code?

Do people set out to intentionally write bad code? Probably not so why does it exist.  Bad code is often arises by necessity such as the need to go fast.  More often bad code is brought about by bad code.  Once the rot has set in a whole wealth of other concerns can lead to bad code such as:

* The lack of autonomy to decide to do something about it
* The desire to get it over with or the relief of something working
* Lack of time and postponing fixing

##What's wrong with Bad Code?

Bad code is a significant impediment to agility.  Bad code requires you to wade through a swamp of questionable patterns, unfathomable depth and unknown breadth.  The programmer has to grope around in the dark hoping to grasp a clue.  This has two effects:

1. Slow development cycles, which increases the time to market for a product or bug fixes.  This increase in time can mean that your competitor gets ahead and increases their market share which leads to reduced profits.  
2. Bad code, give bugs room to hide, and increases the likelihood of introducing bugs and regression.  This does the opposite of delighting your customer can can quickly lose you customers.  Sometimes this can be very serious especially if it leads to security problems.

These lead you in to a downward spiral of doom.  Your development has slowed, so you hire some more programmers to help speed things up.  These new hires do not understand the code, and on-boarding them takes more time away from the existing programmers.  This leads to more rush, therefore more mess, more mistakes, more bad code.  This may cause programmers to leave.  Gradually you replace your team and no one knows how this code got like this.  People ask was there ever a design or a plan?  The code becomes untouchable, and you have to rewrite it in order to keep up with the changes in your industry.  Then you are into all the inherit problems of "The Grand Redesign in the Sky".  


##How do we fix it?

To fix the situation we have to be honest about how the situation has a risen.  Why did we make this mess?  We can look to blame whoever we like, we can say we were only doing our job, but in the end this was our fault.   We were unprofessional.  We should have pushed back on the unrealistic time-lines, the requirements that we had to break the design to meet.  It is our job to defend the code, to make management fully aware of the risks.  It is our responsibility to be professional, for doctors this means washing hands, for builders it means complying to safety standards, for us it means crafting clean code.

##So what is clean code?

There are many definitions. Here is a list of features to help give us an idea:

* Clean code does one thing well, rather than many things
* Clean code is pleasing to read and appreciated
* Clean code exhibits close attention to detail, formating, style, naming, error handling
* Clean code reads like well written prose
* Clean code does not hide its intention and contains only what is necessary
* Clean code has unit and acceptance tests
* Clean code minimizes duplication
* Clean code has simple crisp abstractions
* Every method, class, variable does what you expect
* Clean code makes it look like the language was made for the problem

##How do we do this?

Discipline, knowledge and practice.  

Discipline is required in order to remember that we are authors and we should write with our reader in mind.  Code is read more than it is written. 

Most programmers can recognize a mess but few can see how to transform this mess into something clean.  This has parallels with many other creative professions, for example we can all recognize good food but not all of us can create it, without training, practice and guidance. 

This book aims to give you the knowledge by providing you with an arsenal of tips, techniques and thought processes that can be applied as you practice and improve at developing your craftsmanship. 

##Where do we start?

One of the things that had the strongest lasting impression on me from reading this book the first time was "The Boy Scout Rule".  

**Leave the campground cleaner than you found it**

When applied to code this gives a very professional approach to the problems of decaying code. 