---
layout: post
title:  "Command Line CSV manipulation"
date:   2016-11-30 10:39:54 +0000
categories: awk
---
# Summary

Sometimes it can be useful to manipulate a csv file in the terminal.  This is useful when manipulating the file is a one off requirement.  Manipulating a large csv on the command line can be better than loading it all into memory for example when using a text editor.

## Viewing a CSV
Using the command less to view a csv is useful as it will show you the header rows and the first few.  It also will not load the whole file until it is needed so is very quick to load.

To view the file, where filename is the name of the file you want to view.

```bash
less filename.csv
```

This will bring up the file in the terminal.  If it is a large file you may see this line at the end of the file snippet

```
Calculating line numbers... (interrupt to abort)
```

In order to abort this press ```ctrl``` and ```c``` together.

In order to quit viewing the file type ```:q```

### Viewing properties of a CSV
Sometimes it may be necessary to count the number of rows or columns in a csv file.  This can be done easily and quickly on the command line.

#### Counting rows
This can be done my using the wc command.  Note that this command counts all of the lines which may include the header line.  To see more ways of using the wc command type ```man wc``` you can scroll through the documentation using the arrow keys, when you are done type ```:q``` to quit.

```
wc -l filename.csv
```

* ```wc``` word count command
* ```-l``` to tell word count to use the line counting mode
* ```filename.csv``` for the name of the file you wish to count

#### Counting columns
This is a little trickier, there are a few ways of doing this.  Here is one way, this works on counting the number of commas in the first line.  This will be one less than the number of columns that there are as there does not tend to be a comma at the end of the last column in a csv.

```head -1 filename.csv | tr -d -c ',' | wc -m```

* ```head``` this outputs the first lines of a file
* ```-1``` tells head how many lines to output
* ```filename.csv``` which file the command should use as input data
* ```|``` This is called a pipe, this takes the output from the command on the left and 'pipes' it to the input of the command on the right
* ```tr``` the translate characters command
* ```-d``` tells the tr command to run in delete mode
* ```-c``` says to delete the 'complement' ie. the opposite of what is matched
* ```','``` this tells the tr command what character to match
* ```wc -m``` here we will use the wc command again, this time we will tell it to count characters using the argument ```-m```


## Bulk Editing CSV

When editing a file in the terminal it can be useful to make a copy of the file so should you make any mistakes you always have to original to return to.  This can be done by using cp to copy the file

```bash
cp filename.csv filename_bkp.csv
```
This will create a new file with the name filename_bkp.csv

### Removing rows
This is very easy if you only want the first rows.

```head -1000 filename.csv > shortenedfile.csv```

* ```head``` the head command is used to output the first few lines of a file
* ```-1000``` this tells the head command how many lines to output
* ```filename.csv > output.csv```  This says that the file you wish to use as the source of your data is filename.csv, but that you would like the output to be printed to a new file which we have called output.csv

### Removing columns

If you know you want to keep only a selection of the columns in the csv it can be useful to remove those that you do not need.  This can be done very easily with a command line tool called awk.  Awk is useful for doing this sort of operation with large files as it loads each line at a time therefore the entire file is not loaded into memory.

For example if you wish to only keep columns 2, 3 and 4 of a comma separated csv:

```bash
awk -F, '{print $2"," $3"," $4}' filename.csv > output.csv
```

* ```awk``` is a command which allows you to write and run small programs against individual lines within a file
* ```-F,``` means that you want define the input as being separated by ```,``` - the default is a space
* ```''```  The program that you want to pattern match on is defined inside the single speech marks
* ```{}```  The action you want to happen is defined inside the curly braces
* ```print``` is the command you wish to do, print will output what is passed to it to the file
* ```$2``` This matches the second thing on the line, in this case this will match the second column of a csv
* ```","``` Using the comma in speech marks will make sure this is output to separated with commas when it is printed.
* ```filename.csv > output.csv```  This says that the file you wish to use as the source of your data is filename.csv, but that you would like the output to be printed to a new file which we have called output.csv

If you run this more than once you will get an error in the terminal that says that output.csv file already exists.  To correct this problem either change the name of the output file in the above awk statement, or delete the output file.  Deleting the file can be done on the command line by using the command rm to remove.

```bash
rm output.csv
```

